[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: The grammar, the skills required, the incentives at play, as an economist would say, the kind
[Amit Varma]: of youngsters who come into the game, the kind of people who watch it and the reasons
[Amit Varma]: for which they watch it. Everything about cricket has changed. And in this time, everything
[Amit Varma]: about India has also changed. More than 60% of the country today was born after the forced
[Amit Varma]: economic liberalization of 1991. And the social and cultural changes have been vast. Equally,
[Amit Varma]: in this time, technology has also taken quantum leaps. And the world in 2018 would seem a
[Amit Varma]: science fiction world to the boy of 1991. How could cricket not change?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene in the unseen. My episode last week was called the evolution of everything
[Amit Varma]: in which my brilliant guest Matt Ridley described how Charles Darwin and Adam Smith had the
[Amit Varma]: same grand idea and how everything evolves in bottom up ways. We spoke about the universe,
[Amit Varma]: about life, language, cities, economy and the sense of self in that context. Well, today's
[Amit Varma]: episode is about the evolution of cricket. And my guest is someone who's been a hero
[Amit Varma]: of mine for a couple of decades now. Harsha Bhogle is a legend of cricket commentary,
[Amit Varma]: and he embodies a pleasant contradiction of being both a larger than life figure, as a
[Amit Varma]: celebrity stature makes him, as well as being down to earth and humble. He showed great
[Amit Varma]: kindness to me in my past life as a cricket journalist, which I suspect he may not even
[Amit Varma]: remember. And I was delighted when he agreed to appear on the scene in the unseen to talk
[Amit Varma]: about how cricket has evolved in the course of his nearly three decades in the game. But
[Amit Varma]: before we cut to the conversation I had with him, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls? Well, worry no more. Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into objects of everyday use. These include wearable
[Amit Varma]: art like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and table runners, and accessories
[Amit Varma]: like tote bags. This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at
[Amit Varma]: an accessible price, and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do. What's more,
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products, including fridge magnets with
[Amit Varma]: some stunning motifs, and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood. Their artists
[Amit Varma]: include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Wadswo X Waswo, Brinda Miller, Dilip Sharma, Shruti
[Amit Varma]: Nelson and Pradeep Mishra. They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting,
[Amit Varma]: but even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an OU. And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20. That's
[Amit Varma]: IVM for IVM podcast. IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Harsha, welcome to the scene in the unseen. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Harsha, it's great to finally have you on the show. And before we start talking about
[Amit Varma]: how cricket has evolved over the last 25-30 years that you've been part of the business,
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit more about how you got into becoming a cricket journalist. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: you weren't always a television guy, right? You started off as a lowly print person like
[Guest]: me. I love the use of the word lowly, but long
[Guest]: before the lowly print guy was a guy doing stuff on Yuvvani in Hyderabad. I was doing
[Guest]: a little bit of radio commentary, actually. I did my first ball by ball broadcast when
[Guest]: I was what 19 years old. It was a Ranji Trophy game. Learned a lot. Learned what people should
[Guest]: not do and told myself when I become the senior broadcaster, these are things I will not do
[Guest]: to younger people working with me. But yeah, print happened because I started traveling.
[Guest]: I started touring and print was a source of revenue. And it was allowing me to cover up
[Guest]: for other pursuits that were not going to pay me.
[Guest]: And were you also a cricketer yourself when you started?
[Guest]: I enjoyed playing cricket. I played about seven, eight years of cricket in Hyderabad.
[Guest]: I played three years of senior division cricket, which means I was playing the A1 division
[Guest]: every Sunday. I played two, three inter-college finals, got picked for my university. It's
[Guest]: a very nice, convenient story for people to say, this guy didn't play cricket. I wish
[Guest]: I could have shown them the four black marks on my thighs when we were still without thigh
[Guest]: pads. And I can tell you, I know the pain.
[Guest]: And you were a batsman, obviously, I presume.
[Guest]: Everybody had to bat. We're playing on matting wickets. So batting wasn't such a challenge.
[Guest]: But I started off being an off spinner for my school team. And then one day this kid
[Guest]: turned up at the nets. So we're two of us bowling off spin for school for a year. And
[Guest]: then one day this kid turns up and I looked at him and I said, dude, this guy's in a different
[Guest]: league. So I started bowling leg spin and that's how that's what I bowled for the rest
[Amit Varma]: of my life.
[Guest]: Who was that kid? I thought the story is going to end in this.
[Guest]: No, no, he played for India schools, actually. He went from the nets to our school nets to
[Guest]: India schools in one year, the same year. Started off the school nets in six or eight
[Guest]: months he was playing for India schools. So his name was Anant Vatsalya. Well, fantastic
[Guest]: off spin. I mean, you just I mean, I've always been reasonably good at knowing what I can't
[Guest]: do. So I looked at him and I said, you can't do this. So I started bowling leg breaks.
[Guest]: And that's what I did till I finished university.
[Amit Varma]: And how did you make the transition into full time journalism and then from print into television?
[Guest]: Journalism because I was writing a little bit in Hyderabad. And then of course, I came
[Guest]: to Mumbai and I wrote the odd piece here, the odd piece there. I was working with professional
[Guest]: management group at the time. And while I was at Rediffusion Advertising before that,
[Guest]: I had a couple of pieces published, including one in Debonair for Anil Dharkar, but it was
[Guest]: about umpiring.
[Guest]: I'm going to look up that issue.
[Guest]: Yes, it was about umpiring.
[Guest]: I read Debonair for the articles.
[Guest]: Of course, everyone does. Everybody does. That's what they said about Leboy as well.
[Guest]: And yeah, so one day Tariq Ansari calls me and said, would you want to do the England
[Guest]: tour for us?
[Guest]: And he's the owner of Midday.
[Guest]: He then was the owner of Midday. Actually, when I left PMG, he said, we said, look, we've
[Guest]: got three young women on our sports desk. Can you just help them make the pages? So
[Guest]: come for two hours in the morning. That's it. And the three young girls all went on
[Guest]: to have pretty good careers. One was Hemal Ashar, who worked for Midday. There's Prachwal
[Guest]: Hegde, who still writes very well on tennis. And Sharda Agra, who I've grown to admire
[Amit Varma]: ever since.
[Guest]: She's a legend. And in fact, the other two as well.
[Guest]: There you are. So those were the three young people there. So I'd go for two hours in the
[Guest]: morning. And this was sort of March, April. And then in May, he said, do you want to do
[Guest]: the England tour for us?
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: I said, Tariq, why you and why not one of the women?
[Guest]: Well, to be fair, they were very young. They were starting out. They were all excellent
[Guest]: writers and they still are. But they were just starting out. So in fact, I did 1990
[Guest]: by 91 Sharda was going around on tours. I said, Tariq, whatever you do, don't change
[Guest]: your mind. And he said, so how much will it cost? I said, I have no idea. So I asked R.
[Guest]: Mohan. And he said, whatever you do, don't accept less than 30 pounds a day. Okay. So
[Guest]: Tariq was very generous. He gave me $100 a day, which was about 55, 56 pounds. But I
[Guest]: had to organize all my travel, my stay, everything. When I write a book, I'll write the story
[Guest]: about that. Lugging a manual typewriter with spare paper, carbon paper, spare ribbons,
[Guest]: lugging it around everywhere. Keep typing and then Telex moved to fax. Now I'm sounding
[Guest]: like I'm 200 years old.
[Guest]: Who were the writers who kind of inspired you? The cricket writers?
[Guest]: Not a lot. I mean, as a kid, we used to get Times of India in the afternoon. And we'd
[Guest]: read K.N Prabhu's reports. But I, to be honest, the one, the couple of broadcasters I enjoyed
[Guest]: were Dickey Ratnagar and Anand Sethalwad. And Anand Sethalwad had a lovely cadence about
[Guest]: his voice and it would go lovely up and down and up and down. And I said, wow, that sounds
[Guest]: nice. So those were the two. And for us, the biggest hero growing up was Ameen Sayani because
[Guest]: we'd all listened to Binaka Geetmala.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, remarkable voice as well. And friendly voice. And from print to broadcast, how did
[Amit Varma]: that come about?
[Guest]: Actually, I'd done broadcast earlier because I was doing radio commentary in Hyderabad.
[Guest]: Carried a cassette player to my league, senior division league game. I'm batting six, seven
[Guest]: something. So my openers are batting, our openers are batting. And I recorded commentary
[Guest]: on that, took it to All India Radio. It's a long story. But I did a little bit of radio
[Guest]: commentary there. By the time I went to Ahmedabad, I had already done a few Ranji Trophy games.
[Guest]: While I was in Ahmedabad, I did two one day internationals and a test match. So that came
[Amit Varma]: before. That came before.
[Amit Varma]: And was the nature of commentary different at that time? Like one of the shifts that
[Amit Varma]: sort of happened was, you know, and this happened in television commentary. So maybe it's not
[Amit Varma]: relevant to this. But, you know, back in the day, Richie Beno's advice, legend goes, used
[Amit Varma]: to be that you only say something when you're really adding value. There's no need to describe
[Amit Varma]: every shot because hey, the viewer can see that. And that apparently changed in your
[Amit Varma]: time as a television, this thing where the brief was just filled every moment, keep talking,
[Amit Varma]: don't don't stop.
[Guest]: We had a soundtrack. I mean, if you paused as much as Beno, they'd put a commercial in.
[Guest]: That's a great thing.
[Guest]: Seriously. Radio commentary in India has disintegrated. Radio commentary in India had its highs in
[Guest]: the 70s, 80s, 90s. There were some wonderful broadcasters, Korky, Original, even if you
[Guest]: want to come down from Pearson, Surita and Dev Rajpuri and all the others down to Anand
[Guest]: Settlewad, Dikki Ratnagar, Raj Singh was pretty good himself. There's some Hindi broadcasters,
[Guest]: Suresh Sarai had a style of his own. So there were some really good radio broadcasters.
[Guest]: And we haven't had one since. There's a couple of good ones. Prakash Vakankar is good, Sunil
[Guest]: Gupta is good, but All India Radio is no.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess part of the reason is a lot of the cricket lovers back then must have been
[Amit Varma]: following cricket through radio. So they listen to radio. Today, I suppose very few people
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: In India, not in Australia and England, where radio has held its own. The trick is to do
[Guest]: on one medium, what a more powerful medium either cannot do or does not want to do. Television
[Guest]: is a very powerful medium, but television is a very arrogant, it has a huge ego, television.
[Guest]: Television will not be gentle and mild and polite and fun and informal, which radio can
[Guest]: be. And so radio must do what television cannot do. But in India, we don't have radio commentary
[Guest]: at all. And whatever there is, occasionally we wish there wasn't.
[Guest]: And so literally just a few months back when I was on Crick Buzz and we're doing this,
[Guest]: wanted to start Crick Buzz live and we said, we don't have a single second of footage.
[Guest]: So we can't compete with television. So how do you then compete with television? You do
[Guest]: everything that television will not do. So don't have breaks. Just three people sitting
[Guest]: and chatting about cricket. And we chat about cricket for 25 minutes before the play. We
[Guest]: talk about the team, we talk about the pitch, we talk who's playing, not playing, but it's
[Guest]: an uninterrupted 25 minute conversation with loads of laughter. And we're getting a lot
[Amit Varma]: of views. And one of the interesting kind of shifts
[Amit Varma]: that happened in commentary itself before we get to talking about cricket in a general
[Amit Varma]: way was that sometime around the mid 90s, there was this cult of celebrity where essentially
[Amit Varma]: it became the rule that all commentators had to be ex-cricketers themselves and ex-test
[Amit Varma]: cricketers are, you know, essentially brought in, like the logic would go that, hey, ex-cricketers
[Amit Varma]: would have more insight about how to play the game, but they were essentially brought
[Amit Varma]: in for celebrity value. And you were suddenly the only non ex-cricketer in those terms to
[Amit Varma]: be in the frame. You know, how, how did that transition impact you? How did you respond
[Guest]: to it? Luckily, I started before this happened.
[Guest]: Exactly. So when this came around, I still remember
[Guest]: my first proper television gig was the Hero Cup in 93. And by the time the Hero Cup came,
[Guest]: I'd already done commentary in Australia. I'd been on BBC World Service. There weren't
[Guest]: a lot of English voices that had worked on professional networks before. So I got to
[Guest]: do the Hero Cup. I got to do a bit of television. By then only Gavaskar was around. By 94, Ravi
[Guest]: Shastri came in. By the late 90s, Sanjay Manjrekar came in. So I was lucky that I was in there
[Guest]: before. And I, well, I wasn't competing with them, which is why in that famous interview,
[Guest]: I told Karan Thapar that I'm the non-striker. When I was batting, I always seemed to be
[Guest]: batting with someone who was batting better than me.
[Amit Varma]: And did that change your brief? Because I imagine when you do a radio commentary, you're
[Amit Varma]: doing it essentially as equals. Everyone's got his opinions. You're just chatting, you're
[Amit Varma]: shooting the breeze. But did your brief become in this case to be a sort of a sutradhar or
[Amit Varma]: an enabler where you have to ask questions and get insights out of these stars rather
[Guest]: than necessarily opine a lot on your own? It was not just inevitable. It was appropriate
[Guest]: as well. Because I played school, college, university. I know what it is to hit the ball
[Guest]: of a middle of a bat. I know the joy of holding a cricket, of catching a catch that shouldn't
[Guest]: have been caught. But I have no idea of the pressure of going out to play on the first
[Guest]: morning of a boxing day test. So if I tried, if I pretended that I knew, or if I said to
[Guest]: somebody, you know what, his head is falling over when he plays the drive, it might be
[Guest]: falling over. But I lay myself open to people saying, but how on earth do you know? And
[Guest]: whether I know or don't know, I have to presume I don't know. But I found that I could get
[Guest]: people to say what the average Joe wanted to. So therefore, willing, wittingly or otherwise,
[Guest]: I became the voice of the common man in the in the commentary box. And they said, you
[Guest]: know what, he asked the questions that we want to ask. So you're right. So that's how
[Guest]: I became a facilitator. Radio commentary is completely different. Radio commentary is
[Guest]: a million times easier. Easier. Or any day. Radio commentary is very, very easy because
[Guest]: you can't go wrong. Because unless you lie, how do you go wrong on a radio broadcast?
[Guest]: Because on radio broadcast, you're just telling people what you see. So I don't know if you
[Amit Varma]: remember this. When I was when India toured Pakistan in 2006, I had come along, I was
[Amit Varma]: covering that tour for the Guardian and also writing for Crick Info where I worked at the
[Amit Varma]: time. And I also had this gig where I had to do like a 60 second update for BBC every
[Amit Varma]: day, a number of times a day. And I was struggling with that. And I remember you were very kind
[Amit Varma]: to actually come on your own and sit with me and give me a lot of great advice at the
[Amit Varma]: time, which I still remember and appreciate. But one of the things that struck me when
[Amit Varma]: I was trying to do that to give those 60 second updates, not live or anything, just 60 seconds,
[Amit Varma]: is that as a writer, while I could always search for the right phrase or the right image
[Amit Varma]: and avoid cliches, when I actually started speaking, the only thing which would come
[Amit Varma]: into my head were cliches like, you know, like a tracer bullet and so on. Nothing else
[Amit Varma]: would pop into my head. It became so...
[Guest]: Not your fault. It's not your fault. You were listening to the wrong people.
[Amit Varma]: Oh my God, you're actually saying that on record.
[Guest]: I mean, look, cliches are cliches because they're true. That's why they are cliches
[Amit Varma]: because they're true.
[Amit Varma]: But on radio, that is an imperative that you have that you have to just keep talking. And
[Amit Varma]: therefore, how do you find fresh ways of describing what is happening? You can't bring that sort
[Amit Varma]: of that calculated, careful look that you can when you write some piece.
[Guest]: Some people rehearse sentences. I was once told by Peter Baxter, who was the celebrated
[Guest]: producer of Test Match Special, that a lot of Arlert's best lines, a lot of his best
[Guest]: off the cuff lines were often the most rehearsed. They were often the most scripted. So sometimes
[Guest]: you'd say, right, if this happens, I think I'll say that.
[Guest]: So you need to ensure that you're not too eager to throw out the line because you've
[Guest]: prepared it. It's almost like I've prepared for my civics exam, but they haven't asked
[Guest]: me what I've prepared. So I'll say it nonetheless. You don't do that, but you know that if that
[Guest]: comes that, that's what I'm going to say. So, but some people do that. I never did because
[Guest]: it put too much pressure on you because you were constantly waiting for a situation to
[Guest]: arrive for which your favourite line was best suited. And so sometimes you did a force fit
[Guest]: and it never really worked. So the best thing to do is to go out there and say, you know
[Guest]: what, I'm the most blessed person on the planet. So let me share my happiness with people.
[Guest]: And that's how it comes. But the BBC World Service was one of the most valuable things
[Guest]: in my life because it taught me time. So very often I'd be given 45 seconds to go and I'm
[Guest]: doing this live in the middle of a game. So I'm sitting behind a commentary box using
[Guest]: the producer's phone and making a collect call. You start these AT&T collect calls,
[Guest]: do an AT&T collect call. Somebody in London picks it up, asks for the password. I give
[Guest]: the password. They patch me on and now I'm live. I've got to hear the anchor there in
[Guest]: the studio call my name. And of course, as he's saying, right, it's time to go now to
[Guest]: India or wicket falls. And we don't live in soundproof commentary boxes in India. And
[Guest]: so I can no longer hear the person at the other end. But to cut the noise, I would actually
[Guest]: go under the table to try and cut the noise. But now the problem comes, you have only two
[Guest]: hands. You have to have the watch in front of you because 45 seconds can mean 42 or 48,
[Guest]: but it cannot mean 35 or 55. So you need the watch in one hand. You need to have the phone
[Guest]: in the other. And you need to have the scorecard in front of you. And you need to be in a quiet
[Guest]: place. You need four hands. And I wasn't going to, I wasn't a guard. I only had two hands.
[Guest]: So and if you do that, if you if you try to jam the phone against your ear, then it doesn't
[Guest]: sound right. Right. And then the wind would blow and so the paper would blow away. But
[Guest]: I learned in all those times what 45 seconds was. Yeah. And to gather your thoughts so
[Guest]: that on that watch in front of you when it goes to 35, it knows you mean, you know, you've
[Guest]: got to start winding up by 41, 42, you're almost done. So I learned timing doing that.
[Guest]: So if you're given 45 seconds, you say these are the only two points I can speak. I can't
[Guest]: get the whole story of the match in. I prioritize. If he comes back and tells me, you know what,
[Guest]: we didn't get through to the guy in Frankfurt. We've actually got 140 for you now. You've
[Guest]: got to do 140. You do got to do 140. But in your mind, then you can say, OK, I've got
[Guest]: a third or fourth thing I can include in the broadcast. So that was one of my biggest learnings.
[Amit Varma]: I think in 2006, in fact, I was doing exactly that 45 second thing. And that same thing
[Amit Varma]: would happen if something happened on the field in front of me while the call has come
[Amit Varma]: through like a wicket fall, the someone hits a four or something changes. And I would just
[Guest]: get extremely frustrated. That was actually an opportunity, because that means on a broadcast,
[Amit Varma]: you could tell them live what was happening. So which is amazing. Yeah, I was I was too
[Amit Varma]: naive at that time to kind of manage. So again, before we go on to the cricket, if you had
[Amit Varma]: to sort of give young would be commentators on cricket in any medium that involves speaking
[Guest]: advice, what would you say? Well, peculiarly, the first thing I would say is pick all pieces
[Guest]: of ego in your brain and trample them to death. Because if you have an ego, you've got no
[Guest]: chance in life. I meet a lot of young presenters who want to be primetime television heroes
[Guest]: on day zero, right? It's not going to happen, you are going to make mistakes. And the best
[Guest]: time to make mistakes is when nobody's watching. So give yourself pre run G trophy, finish
[Guest]: making all your mistakes, then when you're ready, you're ready. So actually, I tell everybody
[Guest]: to start doing audio, don't do television, don't do camera, because the camera is this
[Guest]: big enticing thing that makes you look at it a certain way. And then it causes you to
[Guest]: freeze. Right. One of the things I always tell people is why do models always make bad
[Guest]: anchors? Because the models are so obsessed with the angle and the light and the way they
[Guest]: look. But then what are you going to say? And being a good anchor to some extent, does
[Amit Varma]: it just involve just relaxing and letting things happen rather than, you know, being
[Guest]: conscious and maintaining exactly that pose in this expression. The beauty of live television
[Guest]: is you don't even have time to think which pose you're in a way you are. I've had water
[Guest]: thrown on me on a live telecast. I've had people yanking me in all directions. The advantage
[Guest]: of the live telecast is you don't have to be perfect. Right. So I often tell people
[Guest]: a live telecast anchor is like a fighter pilot. He just he just lands, picks up goes. Whereas
[Guest]: a recorded anchors, if you're doing Indian Idol, or you're doing Kaun Banega Crorepati,
[Guest]: then you're like a passenger liner, right? Everything is correct. And someone's opening
[Guest]: the wine and business class and someone just walking down and someone's showing you to
[Guest]: that place. And the livery is perfect. No, in live telecast, no. I mean, there are days
[Guest]: when my armpits have been soaked. There are days where I'm wearing a jacket, not because
[Guest]: I want to wear a jacket because I sweated so much I could squeeze my shirt. There are
[Guest]: days when I've got droplets falling off my eyes, but that's okay. It's live television.
[Guest]: But if you start to think, Oh, how am I looking? Is my makeup coming off a little bit, then
[Guest]: your focus is not on communication. And the reason you're there is to communicate not
[Guest]: not to worry about how you look. If if the way people looked made them successful, then
[Guest]: I want to pass the first exam. So it doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously the first responsibility of a broadcaster of a TV commentator is obviously
[Amit Varma]: towards the viewers. But at the same time, did you also feel that as time went on and
[Amit Varma]: you know, players became more powerful, that there was also another audience in play that
[Amit Varma]: you had to be conscious about what you can or cannot say about some player that you have
[Amit Varma]: to moderate yourself in terms of, you know, maybe pissing the board off or whatever. Do
[Amit Varma]: those considerations come into play?
[Guest]: I was I was blessed amid that my best years in television and I'm saying this very confidently
[Guest]: because I know they've gone that my best years in television coincided with the best set
[Guest]: of human beings that played cricket. There was a Tendulkar, there was a Lakshman, there
[Guest]: was a Dravid, there was a Kumli, there was a Srinath, there was a Ganguly. And I broadcast
[Guest]: through their entire career. There was not one day, not one day that one of them came
[Guest]: up and said, you know what, I didn't like what you said. I can't say the same about
[Guest]: the generation that followed.
[Amit Varma]: I understand. And I won't push you on to that. Let's move on to the cricket.
[Guest]: It also happened because of social media. Because of social media, there's people saying
[Guest]: all kinds of things and people start to believe what they see on social media.
[Amit Varma]: Is it something you're comfortable talking about? Because otherwise I won't push you.
[Guest]: Suppose, very simply, suppose I've said, oh, he played a poor shot on 99. Now, it's all
[Guest]: right to say that. Somebody on social media will then start a rant saying, oh, you don't
[Guest]: like him. That's why you said that. Like, for example, I've been told that I'm a Mumbaikar
[Guest]: and so I reserve my best expressions for Tendulkar. And I'm told you're from Hyderabad. So you
[Guest]: sound far better when you're talking about Lakshman. So people will read what they want
[Guest]: to. When they read that and then it starts getting a life of its own, then it reaches
[Guest]: somebody. And then people start to misinterpret these things. So the arrival of social media
[Guest]: has added a lot of toxicity to communication. And so you've got to be extra careful with
[Amit Varma]: the arrival of social media.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of move on to the cricket now. It's my sense that over the time that you've
[Amit Varma]: been in cricket, the 25-30 years or so, there have been two major inflection points which
[Amit Varma]: have changed cricket. I mean, tell me if you agree and if you want to add to these or add
[Amit Varma]: caveats. One is the television explosion, the satellite television explosion in the
[Amit Varma]: 90s, which just changed the commerce of the game entirely and made India the hub of world
[Amit Varma]: cricket and made players into superstars and everything changed there. And the second would
[Amit Varma]: be in a slightly different sense, the T20 IPL revolution that had the same kind of commercial
[Amit Varma]: impacts, but also it changed the game by changing the incentives for the players, what kind
[Amit Varma]: of cricket they were learning and refining and therefore brought forward a new breed
[Amit Varma]: of players in a manner of speaking, which changed the grammar and language of the other
[Amit Varma]: forms of the game like Test cricket, which I argued in a column which got a lot of flack
[Amit Varma]: recently that perhaps Test cricket is destined to die in these modern times.
[Amit Varma]: I can see why you got flack on that one. But would you broadly say that, I mean, we'll
[Guest]: come to that, you know, when we come to that. I'm a strong point of view on that. You might
[Amit Varma]: be in agreement. So yeah. Yeah. So we'll come to that towards the end. But in general, do
[Amit Varma]: you agree that these are the two main inflection points that we should be focusing on?
[Guest]: Yes, the first of those was not as much a cricketing inflection point as a point that
[Guest]: was forced upon India through the terrible financial position we were in, right? We had
[Guest]: three weeks of foreign currency reserves, when Narsimha Rao became Prime Minister of
[Guest]: India. And I mean, it's fashionable not to talk about Narsimha Rao as it's fashionable
[Guest]: not to talk about why we raid D as it's fashionable not to talk about the self aggrandizing show
[Guest]: ponies or whatever the expression is. But because of that, we had no choice but to open
[Guest]: the economy, the economy opened. The biggest beneficiary of that was Tendulkar, because
[Guest]: the Pepsi's of the world came in. I think Pepsi is actually a pretty good inflection
[Guest]: point, even though it's a brand that we talk about. But Pepsi came in with big budgets.
[Guest]: And as a result, overseas television networks came into India. And Dalmia and Bindra sat
[Guest]: and questioned Doordarshan. And Doordarshan was doing a magnificent job of killing cricket.
[Guest]: Right. It kills all sport. It kills all sport. The coverage was banal. It was boring. The
[Guest]: commentators you I mean, you knew somebody I shouldn't say that because I did get a break
[Guest]: on Doordarshan. I cut my teeth in All India Radio. I made all my mistakes. I owe them
[Guest]: a debt. But there was no deep inner desire for excellence. If you're writing a book and
[Guest]: you want to win a major literary prize, and you say, let me just write 200 words at anything
[Guest]: goes, you don't win a prize like that you must have this great passion to be the best
[Guest]: you can be. And Doordarshan wasn't that it still isn't it cannot be that. The incentives
[Guest]: are simply not tailored towards that. So you cannot get the best talent for the prizes
[Guest]: they were offering. So I can understand the limitations they had. But suddenly we got
[Guest]: world class television producers coming to India. And that made a difference for people
[Amit Varma]: like me. And what also you know, happened in that period just prior to all this was
[Amit Varma]: that Doordarshan actually used to demand money to broadcast matches. Yes. And Dalmia and
[Amit Varma]: Bindra kind of turned this around by just following through on the common sense that
[Amit Varma]: hey, why should we pay you money to broadcast you should pay us because look at the...
[Guest]: There's a fantastic story about that, that Amrit Mathur told me about and Amrit was close
[Guest]: to the board at the time, when South Africa first came to India in late 1991. And the
[Guest]: SABC was a South African broadcasting corporation asked the question of the BCCI that nobody
[Guest]: ever asked before, how much do you want for rights? And they said, Oh, we're supposed
[Guest]: to get money for this. And Amrit tells the story, they said, chalo itna puchte. And then
[Guest]: somebody said, let's ask them, no, they might give more. And as it turns out, SABC offered
[Guest]: more than the BCCI thought they could ever get. Wow. And that is when they realised that
[Guest]: that the sitting on a property that can be monetised. And that is how they went in revolt
[Guest]: against Doordarshan. And then it led to the famous court case and the legal situation
[Guest]: of who owns the airwaves, and whether uplinking is a fundamental right or no, whether anyone
[Guest]: can uplink or no. And it changed the world of live broadcast. But it also because it
[Guest]: brought in all these networks, ESPN came in 95, Prime Sports was around and became Star
[Guest]: Sports. It allowed people like me a break. So I often tell people that across, well,
[Guest]: might be on different points on a logarithmic scale, but the way Tendulkar benefited from
[Guest]: liberalisation in my profession, I benefited similarly, even if the magnitude of the opportunity
[Guest]: was vastly different, but we all benefited from that. I mean, you, me, everyone, all
[Guest]: of India that was reasonably young at that time, benefited enormously from that one moment
[Guest]: when Manmohan Singh and Narsimha Rao and all the people in North Block or South Block,
[Amit Varma]: whatever it's called, sat together and produced that budget. Right. And I mean, obviously
[Amit Varma]: under the, I mean, they were forced to by the IMF and all that, just the way it was.
[Amit Varma]: But regardless of that, that changed all our lives. One of the interesting ways in which
[Amit Varma]: I tell people it changed is, I mean, there are really two ways it seems to me that that
[Amit Varma]: kind of changed. One was that liberalisation itself empowered people in small towns and
[Amit Varma]: middle class India to take up the game and the sort of the demographic representation
[Amit Varma]: of the people who could play cricket and aspire to, you know, playing for India and all of
[Amit Varma]: that changed, which is why you had more and more cricketers in the Northeast coming from
[Amit Varma]: the smaller towns. And another way in which your broadcasting directly contributed was
[Amit Varma]: that a lot more people would watch the game and be exposed to values of modern cricket.
[Amit Varma]: Like every time you praise a John T. Rhodes for doing what he's doing, or you praise people
[Amit Varma]: for running between wickets well and grounding their bat properly, those values are filtering
[Amit Varma]: down into the young 12 year old, 13 year olds who are watching.
[Guest]: It did, Rahul Dravid often tells me that the spread of television, that television became
[Guest]: the best coach a small town kid could get, because there he was watching Tendulkar and
[Guest]: he was hearing Benno and Greg and Gavaskar and everybody talking about it. And so it
[Guest]: almost became like, like the coach he could never have got, because initially, cricket
[Guest]: knowledge was confined to the cities. It was in Mumbai, it was in Bangalore, it was in
[Guest]: Delhi, it was in Chennai, it was in Hyderabad, whatever you look at where the 1983 World
[Guest]: Cup team came from. By the time, well, Saiwag started, Zaheer started, all these guys, the
[Guest]: small town boys started feeling empowered, because they had learned a lot of their cricket
[Guest]: from television. And then you saw the revolution that led to 2007, you saw the fire of small
[Guest]: town India coming through. And now we are well into that revolution to the extent that
[Guest]: the old nursery of Indian cricket, which was the middle income Mumbai boy, who became the
[Guest]: India cricketer, will never ever play for India again.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you could argue the middle income Mumbai boy, quite naturally has a lot of things
[Amit Varma]: competing for his time, a lot else to aspire to which he can realistically achieve. While
[Amit Varma]: this for many small town kids, cricket is still, you know, that dream out there.
[Guest]: It is because the upside is huge, and the downside is minimal. For the middle class
[Guest]: boy who has to get the 10th standard and 12th standard marks, the downside of not making
[Guest]: it in cricket is huge. The upside is, the kind of money now is huge anyway, but the
[Guest]: downside is huge as well.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you wrote a very moving book on Azharuddin and it kind of strikes me as, you know, a
[Amit Varma]: poignant thing that he just got his timing all wrong in the sense, had he come into cricket
[Amit Varma]: 10 years later, he would not have needed to or been tempted to go into those kinds of
[Amit Varma]: directions, which, you know, cast a blemish on his, you know, if he was like born in 1997
[Amit Varma]: and grew up in the IPL age and all that he could have just, yeah, who knows? There's
[Guest]: it is I mean, inadvertently, we've stumbled onto one of the biggest problems of the IPL,
[Guest]: which is, how do you get these children coming from lower to lower middle class households
[Guest]: to feel comfortable with wealth and fame. And it's something that affected people around
[Guest]: that time as well, match fixing and all that thing that happened, which, given our legal
[Guest]: system, it's ridiculous, it was never ever proved. So we can't even say that it happened
[Guest]: because it was it was never proved. But we found that there are people who could get
[Guest]: swayed by the riches and other temptations on offer. And hopefully now that that won't
[Guest]: happen, but there's so much money in the game now that it is something we need to worry
[Guest]: very, very carefully, we need to be very concerned about it. There are people who don't know
[Guest]: what 10 lakhs is, who are getting 200 lakhs for playing six weeks. And suddenly their
[Guest]: family is now saying, okay, how do we get them to stay focused on cricket, keep practicing
[Guest]: their skills, and not say I'll come and bowl four overs, pick up my paycheck and go because
[Amit Varma]: that paycheck goes as quickly as it comes. And you've known cricketers from before the
[Amit Varma]: inflection point of the mid 90s or the early 90s or whatever. And you've known them afterwards
[Amit Varma]: and money has come into the game. And also because of mass media, there's suddenly superstars
[Amit Varma]: at an unprecedented level, including young people who've come from small towns and out
[Amit Varma]: of nowhere, they are superstars, you know, like the Sehwags and the Yuvraj and the Zaheer
[Amit Varma]: and all those guys that first generation of small town kids in a sense, I suppose.
[Unknown]: Harbhajan.
[Amit Varma]: Harbhajan. How did that change them? What did you see? Like, was it harder to cope with
[Amit Varma]: that? Did it get to their head? Did it affect their cricket?
[Guest]: They were very lucky that I mean, Harbhajan had Anil Kumble, for example, a Sehwag had
[Guest]: a Tendulkar, which is why in almost everywhere that I go, I talk about the huge debt that
[Guest]: Indian cricket owes to those group of six or seven players, Ganguly, Tendulkar, Laxman,
[Guest]: Dravid, Srinath, that group of people who came up from fairly similar backgrounds, because
[Guest]: cricketers used to come from middle class families and the middle class is still a storehouse
[Amit Varma]: of values.
[Guest]: So they were grounded middle class guys.
[Guest]: A storehouse of values. The Indian middle class is a storehouse of the right values.
[Guest]: And they all came up from there. You only had to see Rahul Dravid's father to know that
[Guest]: you can offer Rahul Dravid the greatest temptation in the world and he won't be able to look
[Guest]: his father in the eye.
[Guest]: You knew that, I mean, someone once told me if Tendulkar accepts money, then what is left?
[Guest]: And I said, go and look at Tendulkar's family. There's no way on earth that can happen. If
[Guest]: Anil Kumble took money to perform badly, for one, he wouldn't be Anil Kumble, for two,
[Guest]: I wouldn't be broadcasting.
[Guest]: So that group of people, and so the newcomers coming in could see how grounded they were
[Guest]: and how they were learning and how they, so that generation was very influenced.
[Guest]: The new generations, the Harbhajans, the Zaheers, all these guys coming in were very heavily
[Guest]: influenced by this core group of seniors.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just kind of thinking aloud. I mean, we often wonder about why in Pakistan there
[Amit Varma]: is so much churn among players that, you know, people come and they go and very often you
[Amit Varma]: see the celebrity and the money affecting them and they change behavior and they also
[Amit Varma]: seem to be more susceptible to those kinds of influences.
[Amit Varma]: And one possibility could be that for a long time in Pakistan, they said there is no middle
[Amit Varma]: class.
[Amit Varma]: There is just your upper tier of really privileged elites and then everything is less than middle
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, perhaps those typically middle class values which you're talking about simply
[Amit Varma]: weren't there.
[Guest]: It could be under Imran Khan, I can assure you, absolutely nothing would have happened
[Guest]: because Imran was one of the rare cricketing statesmen.
[Guest]: I don't know how good he is as a political leader, but if Imran was in charge of world
[Guest]: cricket, cricket would be very different.
[Guest]: And so a lot of people grew under him and they were scared of him.
[Guest]: But thereafter, you see what's happening now in Pakistan cricket, that there's a lot of
[Guest]: talent coming through.
[Guest]: There's a factory.
[Guest]: Has this always been, I think.
[Guest]: It has.
[Guest]: Because they don't have a proper training, coaching system, a lot of this talent comes
[Guest]: out raw.
[Guest]: And because it's raw, in T20, everything that is a surprise is an advantage.
[Guest]: So I'm not surprised they are the number one T20 team in the world.
[Guest]: But what people don't realize is that two years later, there's a completely different
[Guest]: set of people playing for Pakistan.
[Guest]: And two years later, there's another completely different set of people playing for Pakistan.
[Guest]: There are some survivors.
[Guest]: Hafeez is a survivor and Shoaib Malik is a survivor.
[Guest]: But otherwise, just look at the bowlers.
[Guest]: Two years ago, who was bowling for Pakistan?
[Guest]: Bahab Riaz, Mohammad Aamir, Mohammad Aamir is, they've lost, virtually lost Mohammad
[Guest]: Aamir.
[Guest]: So I think they needed, if they had the Dravid's and Tendulkar's and the Laxman's around them,
[Guest]: then they would have been different.
[Guest]: But that's their problem.
[Amit Varma]: And would you say that the values that the Dravid and the Laxman and the Tendulkar epitomized
[Guest]: are no longer there?
[Guest]: Oh, no, I don't say that.
[Guest]: I mean, I look at Ajinkya Rane, I look at Chhatteshwar Pujara and for all the outward
[Guest]: appearance Virat Kohli retains a great love for the traditions of the game.
[Guest]: Virat Kohli is in the way he bats, is as much a traditionalist as anybody else.
[Guest]: And nobody can ever say that Virat Kohli doesn't love the game enough.
[Guest]: So to that extent, it's all there.
[Guest]: But these are, we're talking of the complete top deck.
[Guest]: Do the younger players want to go through the turmoil of playing Test match credit?
[Guest]: Do they want to feel the ball going past their nose?
[Guest]: When the moment that happens in a T20 game, you're called one short ball for the over,
[Guest]: thank you very much, you can't bowl it again or whatever.
[Guest]: I think there'll be fewer and fewer people who now want to go through the rigor of playing
[Guest]: Test match cricket.
[Guest]: And if you're an Ishan Sharma, you're an Ajinkya Rane, where you've reached a certain level
[Guest]: playing a certain game.
[Guest]: The kid says, but yaar unko IPL contract milega kya?
[Guest]: So I don't know if the next kid wants to be a Pujara or an Ishan Sharma, or he wants to
[Guest]: be someone who will come with a peculiar action and bowl four overs.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's interesting that when I spoke about the current generation, the two players
[Amit Varma]: you named, I mean, Virat, of course, is exceptional, and we'll come to him later, but the two players
[Amit Varma]: you named, Rahane and Pujara, almost seem anachronistic.
[Amit Varma]: Also in the way they play their cricket, which we'll come to, which it doesn't seem to quite,
[Amit Varma]: you know, they're not, they're almost sort of traditionalist players who would have been
[Amit Varma]: great, maybe a generation earlier, but now you kind of wonder, do they really fit in?
[Guest]: Pujara would probably have been far better off playing in an earlier era, right?
[Guest]: Because he's now under pressure to deliver every time.
[Guest]: I think we've made a couple of good players very insecure.
[Guest]: The Pujaras and the Rahanes, and even to some extent, Ravi Chand and Ashwin.
[Guest]: Ashwin is a Kumble incarnation.
[Guest]: He's the same height, the similar education, love, similar intelligence, similar things.
[Guest]: And just as Kumble was told all his life that you don't turn a ball and he took 600 wickets.
[Guest]: Ashwin, we're always searching for what Ashwin cannot do when he's got 330 test wickets.
[Guest]: And yet we are finding reasons to keep leaving Ashwin out.
[Guest]: And I mean, we go across the world and they laugh at us.
[Guest]: He's got 330 wickets, he's got to 300 faster than anybody in the history of the game.
[Guest]: And we say, yeah, that's because he bowled in those conditions.
[Guest]: Jimmy Anderson's just come to Sri Lanka.
[Guest]: He's played two test matches, got one wicket.
[Guest]: And he says he feels like a fish out of water, he's not playing the next test match.
[Guest]: And here's a spinner who's, I mean, Kumble took three, four turns to learn to bowl overseas.
[Guest]: Yeah, but anyway, to come back to the point that these three people are classic old fashioned
[Guest]: players.
[Guest]: It's interesting where they come from.
[Guest]: Rane comes from middle class Mumbai.
[Guest]: Pujara comes from a father who was so much in love with the way cricket was played that
[Guest]: he made him that kind of player.
[Amit Varma]: And Ashwin comes from, I don't think he comes from Chennai, I think he comes from Madras.
[Amit Varma]: That's very well said.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think Ashwin should be in the one day side?
[Guest]: It depends on his, I think it's his fielding that's letting him down.
[Guest]: Because today, in the way Virat Kohli wants to construct a side, he wants the 15 runs,
[Guest]: the 10 runs that Jadeja will save for him in the field.
[Guest]: And Jadeja is, I mean, I think his, Yuvraaj at his peak, is that standard as a fielder.
[Guest]: So the moment Ashwin is a little slow chasing the ball to third man, you start to think,
[Guest]: oops, that's another single gone there, that's another two runs gone there.
[Guest]: But I would definitely have him because at number seven, you still want someone who can
[Guest]: bat.
[Guest]: We hardly have people who can bat and bowl.
[Guest]: I would definitely have him in the mix.
[Guest]: Ashwin Jadeja and the two wrist spinners and Krunal Pandya.
[Guest]: This would be my five.
[Guest]: Your five stock spinners.
[Amit Varma]: All remarkable players.
[Amit Varma]: We'll take a quick commercial break and then we'll come back and talk about the other great
[Amit Varma]: inflection point in the IPL revolution.
[Amit Varma]: Hey, it's been another great week on IVM podcast.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please, please, please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: We're IVM podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: And we'll see you next week.
[Unknown]: Bye.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please, please, please make sure you do where
[Unknown]: IBM podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: Our Instagram page is actually pretty interesting.
[Unknown]: The stories we do are the team and what they're doing on a day to day basis.
[Unknown]: And you know, they're pretty kind of fun.
[Unknown]: Take a look at them.
[Unknown]: Let us know what you think.
[Unknown]: This week on Cyrus Cyrus's guest is writer and journalist Namita Devi Dayal.
[Unknown]: She talks about how she got into journalism, her background in Indian classical music and
[Unknown]: her upcoming book titled The Sixth String of Vilayat Khan.
[Unknown]: On the scene and the unseen, Amit Verma's guest is a cricket commentator and journalist
[Unknown]: whose voice most cricket fans can identify.
[Unknown]: I hope you guess that is Harsha Pogale.
[Unknown]: He spoke to Amit about the evolution of Indian cricket, its rise and the changes that he
[Unknown]: has witnessed over the years.
[Unknown]: Really, really great episode.
[Unknown]: And we're really excited to have Harsha on the network.
[Unknown]: Please definitely check it out.
[Unknown]: We also launched a brand new show called the Paperback podcast hosted by Racheta Sharma
[Unknown]: and Satyajit Roy.
[Unknown]: Every week they'll talk to industry experts about five of their favorite nonfiction books.
[Unknown]: The first episode featuring Apoorva Damani of Artha Ventures is out on the fifth.
[Unknown]: On the Rediscovery podcast final episode of this season, Ambika and Harsha talked to Pankil
[Unknown]: Shah and Sumit Gambhir.
[Unknown]: They talked food, travel and the secret ingredients to a decade of managing Indian restaurants.
[Unknown]: Pankil and Sumit were also participants in our other show, the Colaba Cartel.
[Unknown]: So definitely be a fun conversation and definitely check them out.
[Amit Varma]: And with that, let's move on with the show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Harsha Pogale about the evolution of cricket in his lifetime.
[Amit Varma]: You know, T20 cricket changed so much, not just in terms of commerce in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: it brought a new viewership to the game, and it also allowed a much wider pool of people
[Amit Varma]: to make a living than was otherwise happening.
[Amit Varma]: But it also changed the sort of the way people played their cricket.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, before the break, you were talking about how the 10 runs that Jadeja
[Amit Varma]: might save over Ashwin, they matter far more in limited formats.
[Amit Varma]: And people are kind of recognizing that in a T20 game, even a single run saved can be
[Amit Varma]: a big deal.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, it also, to some extent, explains the rise of wrist spinners.
[Guest]: I think the wrist spinners are coming in for a reason, which is that a lot of people with
[Guest]: big bats are hitting through the line, and miss hits are going for six.
[Guest]: The single greatest criminal act in T20 cricket is to bring the boundary ropes in.
[Guest]: And so miss hits are going for six.
[Guest]: As a result, anything that deviates off the surface, people are finding it difficult.
[Guest]: You notice no one can play swing bowling anymore.
[Guest]: I was in England earlier this year, and I asked somebody, I said, is swing outlawed?
[Guest]: Is the people not allowed to swing the ball anymore?
[Guest]: So the moment the wrist spinner turns the ball, when you attack the wrist spinner, you're
[Guest]: playing into his hands.
[Guest]: The same wrist spinners cannot buy a wicket in Test match cricket.
[Guest]: Kuldeep Yadav is not yet a Test match cricketer.
[Guest]: Chahal has not even been considered for Test match cricket.
[Guest]: Imran Tahir is not a Test match cricketer.
[Guest]: Rashid Khan, the world's number one T20 player, couldn't bowl a spell right in the Test match.
[Guest]: Sunil Narayan is not a Test match cricketer.
[Guest]: You look at all these spinners that are doing well, they don't do well in Test match cricket
[Guest]: because batsmen are not charging and hitting them through the line.
[Guest]: But they're waiting and milking them for a single.
[Guest]: And all of a sudden, they don't have the guile to get them out.
[Guest]: So that's a change that T20 has happened.
[Guest]: It's brought about bowlers who are very good when they're attacked.
[Guest]: And the batsmen have no choice but to attack because the run rate is hovering over his
[Amit Varma]: head.
[Amit Varma]: That's the grammar of the game.
[Amit Varma]: And that also buttresses the point that T20 and Test cricket, you know, calling them both
[Amit Varma]: cricket sort of implies they are the same sport and they're not the same sport.
[Amit Varma]: They're different sports with different imperatives and different demands.
[Amit Varma]: And I would not even say one is necessarily superior to the other.
[Amit Varma]: That's a question of taste and nostalgia and those play into it.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, the argument I made when I spoke about why Test cricket might be dying is that
[Amit Varma]: because T20 is so much more lucrative for young people coming into the game, because
[Amit Varma]: there's a much better chance of grabbing an IPL contract and making a lot of money that
[Amit Varma]: way rather than actually play for Test cricket for India.
[Amit Varma]: You know, young cricketers are incentivized to tailor their skills towards T20 cricket,
[Amit Varma]: which is why you might end up with a generation which cannot play swing bowling anymore, as
[Amit Varma]: you pointed out.
[Amit Varma]: And we might never, for example, have a good Test series in England because those skills
[Amit Varma]: are simply gone.
[Guest]: Is that a worry you share?
[Guest]: There's another reason.
[Guest]: Just imagine now that you're a television network that is keeping our game alive by
[Guest]: the vast amounts of money you're pumping into the game.
[Guest]: And you're paying what 40-50 crores a day, suppose.
[Guest]: I think it's more than that.
[Guest]: But whatever, let's assume it's 40-50 crores a day.
[Guest]: And there's India versus West Indies.
[Guest]: They're not allowed to play the fourth day.
[Guest]: So suddenly fourth day gone, fifth day gone, but your contract requires you to pay that
[Guest]: money, right?
[Guest]: So straight away, your 200 crores has gone to charity.
[Guest]: Why would you want to put so much money in Test match cricket?
[Guest]: A lot of people say they're watching Test match cricket and they say Test match cricket
[Guest]: is the ultimate and Test match cricket is the greatest.
[Guest]: Yeah, Mother Teresa was too.
[Guest]: These are all Mother Teresa statements.
[Guest]: If you are that interested in the game, then you buy a ticket and go and watch the game.
[Guest]: If you're that interested in the game, you sit in front of your television, boost the
[Guest]: viewership figures and get people to advertise on it and be part of the cricket economy.
[Guest]: If you're merely following scores on Crickbuzz, you're not contributing to the Test match
[Guest]: cricket economy.
[Guest]: You're still saying, I like Test cricket, but you're doing nothing for its sustenance.
[Guest]: It's like saying, I like poverty alleviation, but now I'll go and have a gin and tonic.
[Guest]: So you've got to actually actively participate in that and that's not happening.
[Guest]: So Test cricket will survive.
[Guest]: I'm not saying Test cricket will die.
[Guest]: Test cricket will survive because it's got too much going for it.
[Guest]: You'll never otherwise get 50 days of live cricket on a telecast.
[Guest]: Telecast needs dal chawal as well.
[Guest]: So that is Test cricket.
[Guest]: And even now there is a Kohli generation that says we love Test match cricket, that wants
[Guest]: to do well in Test match cricket.
[Guest]: The records go back 140 years and you can compare over 140 years.
[Guest]: T20 is like the 17th premiership game.
[Guest]: Do you remember what happened between Arsenal and Southampton?
[Guest]: Do you remember what happened between North East United and Mumbai AFC?
[Guest]: No, I don't.
[Guest]: T20 cricket is like that.
[Guest]: You come there, have your fun and you go back.
[Guest]: There's no place for a T20 game in history.
[Guest]: It's like Major League Baseball.
[Guest]: Do you know what happened in the 42nd game?
[Guest]: You don't know.
[Guest]: So records are maintained over a period of time.
[Guest]: And so a particular performance gets forgotten very quickly.
[Guest]: So that is why I think Test cricket will survive.
[Guest]: The reason I want Test cricket to never die is because Test cricket is the greatest manifestation
[Guest]: of life on a sporting field.
[Guest]: You get a second chance, you grind your way out of trouble.
[Guest]: We all go through situations in life where we think the world is against us.
[Guest]: That's two fast bowlers bowling at you on a green track.
[Guest]: But you don't give your wicket away.
[Guest]: You hang in and you hang in and you hang in.
[Guest]: And then when the other bowler comes, you squeeze a single here and squeeze a single
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: That is what we do in life.
[Guest]: And we're going through a difficult phase.
[Guest]: So I hope Test cricket never goes.
[Guest]: But I think Test cricket will become what marketing people call the loss leader.
[Guest]: It will continue to make losses.
[Guest]: It will be funded by T20.
[Guest]: Does it make losses?
[Guest]: Oh, 100%.
[Guest]: 100% it does.
[Guest]: I mean, you'll find people say, no, it doesn't make losses.
[Guest]: Of course it does.
[Guest]: I mean, you must ask people who put money behind sport.
[Guest]: My sort of dipstick is media buyers.
[Guest]: I think media buyers understand the market better than anybody else because they're spending
[Guest]: someone else's money.
[Guest]: They have skin in the game.
[Guest]: If you ask them, bid for Test cricket alone, ask them what percentage of the bid they would
[Guest]: put in, if they would put in a bid at all.
[Guest]: You'll get some very interesting answers.
[Guest]: I've asked that question, but I've got those answers in confidence.
[Guest]: But it'll be very interesting to ask people that this massive billion dollar television
[Guest]: contracts, if you had to bid separately for Test match cricket, how much would you bid?
[Guest]: What percentage, if at all?
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, like you, I love Test cricket and you put it so beautifully, manifestation
[Amit Varma]: of life on a cricket field.
[Amit Varma]: I think it reveals character like no other sport can and no other form of cricket, which
[Amit Varma]: are different sports anyway.
[Amit Varma]: And like you, I hope it survives and continues to be subsidized by T20 cricket, as is no
[Amit Varma]: doubt the case.
[Amit Varma]: But a lot of people who express these sentiments also are just to use that popular phrase these
[Amit Varma]: days, virtue signaling.
[Guest]: They're not actually putting their money where their mouth is.
[Guest]: They're like the Manchester United fans.
[Guest]: I don't actually I don't know anything about English football, but my club is Manchester
[Unknown]: United.
[Guest]: They're a hardcore United supporters.
[Guest]: But if I don't know anything about Premiership, I'm United, you know, it's like that.
[Guest]: A lot of people who have no idea about the glory, about all the elements of Test match
[Guest]: cricket will tell you, I love Test match cricket.
[Guest]: It's pure cricket.
[Guest]: As if to say that T20 cricket is full of chemicals and preservatives that are going to kill you
[Guest]: the moment you hit it.
[Guest]: No, T20 cricket is extraordinarily skilled cricket, extraordinary skills.
[Guest]: You ask someone to score 12 in three balls to win a game.
[Guest]: You have to have skills.
[Guest]: You have to have presence of mind.
[Guest]: You have to be calm.
[Guest]: You have to be there to be able to win it.
[Guest]: You've got to know one mistake and I'm gone.
[Guest]: It just requires a completely different set of skills.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: It's not that one set of skills is necessarily superior or inferior to the other skills.
[Amit Varma]: They're just different skills and time becomes a great element.
[Amit Varma]: Time becomes a great restraint and a great challenge in the shorter forms of the game.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you have to develop skills according to that.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing is you pointed out how Kohli still loves Test cricket.
[Amit Varma]: But one reason for that could be that Kohli sort of grew up as a kid in the generation
[Amit Varma]: which held Tendulkar and Dravid and all these guys on awe and he got some of those values.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, I don't know any of the kids today personally, but we'll say Hardik Pandya and
[Amit Varma]: so on still revere Test cricket in that way.
[Amit Varma]: They might pay lip service to it because they've seen the captain do it.
[Guest]: They will say that.
[Guest]: I have this fantasy world I want to reside in once where a truth serum exists.
[Guest]: Where every time I see someone, I just creep up from behind and jab a truth serum into
[Guest]: them and now they have to tell the truth.
[Guest]: Wasn't there a Jim Carrey movie like that?
[Guest]: I don't remember.
[Guest]: And then I'd love to hear what people have to say about Test match cricket to see whether
[Guest]: they actually want to enjoy it the same way or not.
[Guest]: They call it dumbing down.
[Guest]: Yes, it is.
[Guest]: It's dumbing down by your definition of what you should be.
[Guest]: It is because it's our intellectual level.
[Unknown]: It's not kids, you know, you know, it's not the kind of poetry we studied when we were
[Unknown]: children.
[Guest]: Look at Chetan Bhagat.
[Guest]: Look at.
[Guest]: He sells, he sells books.
[Guest]: He's writing to a different audience.
[Guest]: Someone else writes to a different audience.
[Guest]: There is a Satyajit Ray movie.
[Guest]: There was a Manmohan Desai movie.
[Guest]: So you choose what you get.
[Amit Varma]: You pick what you want.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not even the same kind of difference.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's the anchoring effect that we're used to cricket being over five days.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if a Test cricket did not exist and T20s were the dominant form of the game
[Amit Varma]: and then somebody said, hey, I have a brainwave.
[Amit Varma]: Let's play this over five days.
[Amit Varma]: You'd laugh him out of the room the same way if someone said that a football match should
[Amit Varma]: not be 90 minutes.
[Amit Varma]: Let's have a six hour game.
[Amit Varma]: You'd laugh him out of the room and the skills required for that would be completely different.
[Amit Varma]: But they wouldn't necessarily be romanticized over this one.
[Guest]: You know, you said something is, is it, is it really cricket as we knew it?
[Guest]: The laws are largely the same.
[Guest]: There are little playing conditions here and there that are different.
[Guest]: Like football spawned futsal.
[Guest]: Should we call cricket, quicket?
[Guest]: And say, okay, that was cricket.
[Guest]: This is quicket.
[Guest]: You know, let's, let's play.
[Guest]: Let's play this.
[Guest]: But eventually, you know, the, the romantics always have to bow to the, to commerce.
[Guest]: Whether you're a broadcaster, wants to radio and moves to television or whether you want
[Guest]: to play, you want to play limited overs cricket.
[Guest]: I mean, there's, there's just no comparison.
[Guest]: Look what AB de Villiers has done.
[Amit Varma]: Mind-blowing.
[Amit Varma]: What do you think of AB de Villiers?
[Amit Varma]: He's a genius.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I used to say at one point that partly because of the imperatives of the new kind
[Amit Varma]: of cricket that he is more skilled than any other player, batsman in the history of the
[Amit Varma]: game because of the 360 degree game.
[Guest]: I'm just a bit worried about that because we have seen certain set of people.
[Guest]: We have not seen, say, Lara in his prime.
[Guest]: There was not that much television or even going further back.
[Guest]: So if we consign that, if we confine it to the period under our observation, he's just
[Guest]: a genius.
[Guest]: The things he does on a cricket ground that should be outlawed, that should not be allowed.
[Guest]: And the other day he had a switch at six over mid wicket.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: I mean, I, I admire the switch.
[Guest]: I think it should never have a place in cricket because it's so against the bowler, but he
[Guest]: can hit a switch at six.
[Guest]: He can lap a six over, over a fine leg.
[Guest]: He can reverse lap it over third man.
[Guest]: And he's doing that to Dale Steyn.
[Guest]: He's hitting a hundred of 31 balls, Samit.
[Guest]: Hundred of 31 balls.
[Guest]: I told someone the other day, I said, you know, I used to be playing book cricket and
[Amit Varma]: I didn't even score a hundred and thirty one balls in book cricket.
[Amit Varma]: I used to play book cricket as well.
[Amit Varma]: Who remembers book cricket?
[Amit Varma]: Outrageous.
[Guest]: That talent is just outrageous.
[Guest]: And then he plays 240 balls to score 25 or 30.
[Guest]: Because that's what the game demanded.
[Guest]: And he can do that too.
[Unknown]: And he can do that too.
[Unknown]: What a player.
[Unknown]: Amazing.
[Amit Varma]: What a player.
[Amit Varma]: And also another amazing player, Virat Kohli, where he'll have a similar impact, but without
[Amit Varma]: all these switch hits, just playing the orthodox game to a different purpose.
[Guest]: 2016 or the 2017, the IPL just come and go so quickly.
[Guest]: He almost got a thousand runs in the IPL.
[Amit Varma]: I think he got about 974, the same as Bradman series record.
[Guest]: No switch hit, no lap shots, just proper correct cricket shots.
[Guest]: In the last three years, the evolution of Virat Kohli has been as thrilling to watch
[Guest]: as the evolution of any great player in the history of the game.
[Guest]: And I just thought the way he played in England earlier this year, he was lucky.
[Guest]: Everybody is lucky.
[Guest]: Tendulkar was lucky.
[Guest]: Dravid was lucky.
[Guest]: Sobers was lucky.
[Guest]: Bradman was lucky.
[Guest]: You make your own luck, as I say.
[Guest]: I mean, on 20, playing and missing against Anderson, he gets dropped by David Malan.
[Guest]: And then he goes and scores 100.
[Guest]: He made 530 runs in that series.
[Guest]: The last time he went there, he'd be at 140.
[Guest]: And the way he played Anderson, he just said, I will not get out to Anderson.
[Guest]: He played and missed, yes.
[Guest]: But he could just see the ferocious desire.
[Guest]: To me, Kohli versus Anderson this year was like a sermon being delivered on the greatness
[Guest]: of Test match cricket.
[Guest]: Because Anderson could not be taken off after two overs.
[Guest]: You could not suddenly say, but I can't have more than one slip.
[Guest]: I must have five fielders outside the circle.
[Guest]: No, no prisoners taken.
[Guest]: No chance.
[Guest]: He's not going anywhere for the next nine overs.
[Guest]: You've got 54 balls coming at you.
[Guest]: You better play them.
[Guest]: And I can have six around the bat.
[Guest]: I can have seven.
[Guest]: I can do what I want.
[Guest]: Now every ball is an exam.
[Guest]: You didn't like thermodynamics, right?
[Guest]: You've got 54 thermodynamics papers coming at you one after the other.
[Guest]: But to me, I mean, I would watch Anderson and you know, in England, if you leave a ball
[Guest]: that you meant to play and you just leave it, those crowds out there will go, well left
[Guest]: young man.
[Guest]: Because they'll get it.
[Guest]: Well left young man.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: If you want to enjoy Test cricket, go to the Boxing Day Test.
[Guest]: But that's in Melbourne where you're one of 90,000.
[Guest]: You're an ant.
[Guest]: Go to England and watch Test match cricket.
[Guest]: They'll clap.
[Guest]: They clap everybody.
[Guest]: In our country, we're reaching a stage we're not allowed to clap for the opposition.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me something, 10 years ago, 11 years ago, when Kohli kind of first started appearing
[Amit Varma]: on the scene when he got, you know, when he came out of the under 19 ranks and he was
[Amit Varma]: sort of promoted up to the senior ranks.
[Amit Varma]: With a temper and a tattoo.
[Guest]: Did you have a sense that he will become this?
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Guest]: I mean, it's very easy to say I spotted that talent.
[Guest]: Hindsight bias.
[Guest]: Nobody did.
[Guest]: In fact, we still said the moving ball as late as 2014.
[Guest]: We were saying, wow, what a player.
[Guest]: But you know what?
[Guest]: The moving ball troubles him.
[Guest]: And I think it's come about, you see Kohli and you see arrogance.
[Guest]: And you see Kohli and you think my way or the highway.
[Guest]: You see Kohli and you think I want this, this, this, this is how it should be played.
[Guest]: What you do not see is the extraordinary discipline that has taken him where he has reached.
[Guest]: And that has not changed in the game over the last hundred years.
[Guest]: Just knowing what is right for you, having the great perseverance to actually go and
[Guest]: do that, nobody becomes great in test match cricket without having worked backside off.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a sense, a stereotype that, oh, he's a very aggressive guy.
[Amit Varma]: But I think what people don't realize is that the aggression is not just in the MCBC
[Amit Varma]: gullies on the field or that kind of behavior.
[Amit Varma]: That aggression is something that goes into his work ethic and that produces that intense
[Amit Varma]: hunger, which is, I mean, I think he probably has the greatest work ethic of any sportsperson
[Amit Varma]: I can remember.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I can't remember a fitter Indian cricket and you know, to turn himself from that teenager
[Guest]: who we remember.
[Guest]: Yeah, but you see, but you see, he also had outstanding fitness trainers.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: He also had great dietitians.
[Guest]: I have seen Rahul Dravid in a gym lifting weights and Rahul Dravid was putting his body
[Guest]: through his body was complaining and screaming in 12 different languages.
[Guest]: But he was still doing it.
[Guest]: And when I was walking on the treadmill next door and I said to him after I said, Rahul,
[Guest]: why are you doing all this?
[Guest]: He said, I'm well over 30 now.
[Guest]: I've got to be fitter than the next guy to survive.
[Guest]: Rahul Dravid's work ethic, Tendulkar's work ethic was just unbelievable.
[Guest]: What we are seeing with Kohli now is the chiseling of ability.
[Guest]: But he's got he's got the best tools that an earlier generation did not have.
[Guest]: He's got the technology, those guys really.
[Guest]: He does.
[Guest]: But the aggression does spill over as well.
[Guest]: It's not only in it does spill over.
[Amit Varma]: So when you kind of look back over this journey, like you, you started well before these inflection
[Amit Varma]: points, you really started reporting at a time where you still had potbelly cricketers
[Amit Varma]: on the field sometimes.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a whole different sort of pace of playing and media meant something completely
[Amit Varma]: different and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you've sort of traveled all this distance and you look at the cricketers today.
[Amit Varma]: And is it really the same game?
[Amit Varma]: Other things you loved about cricket still there?
[Amit Varma]: Have they changed?
[Amit Varma]: Have you found new things to love?
[Guest]: Earlier you could love one game.
[Guest]: Now you can love three.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Earlier you could only love Test match cricket.
[Guest]: Now you can love Test match cricket.
[Guest]: You can love one day international cricket and you can love T20.
[Guest]: You can have a Dhoni who never really enjoyed Test match cricket.
[Guest]: In T20, he was a fine player, but Dhoni the one day cricketer, you now if there was no
[Guest]: one day cricket, would we have seen the glory of Dhoni?
[Guest]: Maybe the finest limited over one day player ever to play for India.
[Guest]: Yeah, incredible.
[Guest]: But would you have enjoyed Dhoni if you had not had that form of cricket?
[Guest]: If we had only Test match cricket, would we have really appreciated the glory of Dhoni?
[Guest]: If we had only T20, would Dhoni have been just one among other fantastic players?
[Guest]: But ODI allowed you to do that.
[Guest]: So cricket's now given us three things to drool over, to enjoy.
[Guest]: Earlier it gave you only one.
[Guest]: And you briefly referred earlier to how it's changed lives.
[Guest]: The arrival of T20 has changed so many lower middle class Indian houses because earlier
[Guest]: only 15 could play for India.
[Guest]: 20 could aspire to play for India.
[Guest]: Well, in the short list to play for India.
[Guest]: And now 120 can make a career.
[Guest]: If you can't, you'll get a couple of lakhs if you're a good player playing the Tamil
[Guest]: Nadu Premier League.
[Guest]: And then you break into the Ranji Trophy, you'll make another 8-10 lakhs if you're playing
[Guest]: every game.
[Guest]: So what the IPL has done is incredible.
[Guest]: It's lifted people out from where they were.
[Guest]: So I have a lot of time for IPL and ODI.
[Guest]: But you're right.
[Guest]: The arrival of colour television in the 80s, the liberalisation of the early 90s and the
[Guest]: world T20 of 2007 that led to the arrival of the IPL would probably be the three biggest
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: For Indian cricket, if you're going a little further back, of course, the arrival of Kerry
[Guest]: Packer.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: The arrival of Kerry Packer and the removal of those old fashioned ways of looking at
[Guest]: test cricket where the player always, the player's finances came last.
[Amit Varma]: I had a great episode with Gideon Hay and Prem Panikkar on that.
[Amit Varma]: Gideon, of course, wrote a book about the whole Kerry Packer revolution and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So we spoke about Kerry Packer and the IPL in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, before the IPL started, there were lots of sceptics about how the game will
[Amit Varma]: be corrupted.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember writing a column in Cricket Friday that I'm arguing exactly the same things
[Amit Varma]: that just in terms of the impact it's going to have the cricketers themselves, it is absurd
[Amit Varma]: to oppose it, because it'll just make it the money will spread out so much, it'll finally
[Amit Varma]: become...
[Guest]: Amit, I read a lovely line.
[Guest]: And if you heard this line from me before, pardon me, I read a lovely line about seven,
[Guest]: eight years ago.
[Guest]: And it said that influencers in society are always one generation behind reality.
[Guest]: And you can see that in our game everywhere.
[Guest]: The people who run our game are one generation behind the consumers of the game.
[Guest]: Just as a consumer marketer in his 40s or 50s has to live with the challenge of knowing
[Guest]: what a 20 something kid wants to buy, or a family that's earning 10,000 rupees a month
[Guest]: in a family of six needs to do, he has to understand that.
[Guest]: Similarly, the people running the game have to understand what the 20 somethings feel
[Guest]: about the game.
[Guest]: We can't say, ah, there's only girls and women, we don't care about them.
[Guest]: No, they're now in what, almost 30% of your audience.
[Guest]: So we're way behind.
[Guest]: And so every time something new comes, people will say, ah, our game is no longer the same.
[Guest]: It's the pyjama cricket, it's rescued cricket.
[Guest]: T20 cricket came, rescued cricket.
[Amit Varma]: And has this realization of the change filtered down to the commentary box?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if you look at the demographic profile of commentary boxes, you got a lot of old
[Amit Varma]: people, you got the venerable Mr. Gavaskar in his 70s.
[Amit Varma]: Have they kind of, was that a slow process where they began to figure out what's happening?
[Guest]: Is there still a sense of denial?
[Guest]: It's a very, no, I don't think they don't like T20 cricket.
[Guest]: T20 cricket requires a very different kind of broadcast.
[Guest]: In T20 cricket, you've got to keep pace with the action as well.
[Guest]: Whereas in Test match cricket, sometimes you can just pause and let it go and the wind
[Unknown]: is blowing by and oh, what a lovely, oh, I say, what a shot that was.
[Guest]: In T20, you've got to be up there with the action.
[Guest]: And so, and very often with the commercial intrusion, you have to say in 10 words what
[Guest]: you would like to say in 40.
[Guest]: So it's a very different kind of game.
[Guest]: I absolutely enjoy doing it.
[Guest]: If you ask me what is the one broadcast you'd like to do, it'd be the last four hours of
[Guest]: a T20 game.
[Guest]: Because that's when the excitement is building up.
[Guest]: Every ball has, every ball is so critical.
[Guest]: So it has changed, yes.
[Guest]: But overall, broadcasting has changed.
[Guest]: Producers are demanding different things from broadcasters than they did.
[Guest]: It's still irritating to just repeat what you've just seen.
[Guest]: But the game needs more storytellers than ever before, because someone's watching at
[Guest]: home, he doesn't want a lesson in physics on a straight line on whether head is, whether
[Guest]: knee is, whether toe is and see how it's moving.
[Guest]: Yes, you need to know that.
[Guest]: What the lady in Gulbarga is not interested.
[Guest]: Lady in Gulbarga wants to know why is Virat Kohli getting it right?
[Guest]: What is Virat Kohli going to do in this situation?
[Guest]: So you need storytellers.
[Guest]: And I'm overjoyed that this year, both Fox and Channel 7 in Australia post the Channel
[Guest]: 9 rights transfer, have said we're going to go back the old television way, which is having
[Guest]: callers and summarizers.
[Guest]: The callers have seen the game for a long time, they place all the action in perspective,
[Guest]: they don't tell you what is right or wrong.
[Guest]: That they get the summarizer to say, or sometimes they say, oh, they're not a great ball.
[Guest]: That's okay.
[Guest]: But very clearly defined, cricket's the only sport that has gone all player, right?
[Guest]: Football has callers.
[Guest]: Football's the biggest game in the world.
[Guest]: Every sport has callers because it's a completely different skill.
[Guest]: It's a very different skill to be able to keep pace with the game, to be able to find
[Guest]: the words for the narrative.
[Guest]: I mean, without Tony Gregg's commentary on Desert Storm, would Tendulkar's innings have
[Guest]: had the same impact?
[Guest]: I mean, I remember when Tendulkar was, our post-season time, was doing that walk around
[Guest]: the Wankhede Stadium.
[Guest]: There's a producer, young producer of ours, he just nudged me and said, you.
[Guest]: And I said, me?
[Guest]: He said, yeah, you know, Sachin, since he was 14, you, you'll understand this moment
[Guest]: better.
[Guest]: And I got to describe that last moment of Tendulkar, and I could add all the feeling
[Guest]: because I knew exactly what was going on through his mind.
[Guest]: And Ian Bishop was sitting next to me, and he started, and I said, Ian?
[Guest]: He said, no.
[Guest]: But when Carlos Brathwaite hit the four sixes, nobody knew what it meant more than Ian Bishop
[Guest]: did.
[Guest]: And so Bishop was able to get the best words out.
[Guest]: So you need, still need to be a storyteller.
[Guest]: If you've played international cricket at the highest level, and you're an excellent
[Guest]: storyteller without the ego to understand just what the man in the street wants, you
[Guest]: have a huge advantage over someone like me who's not played the game.
[Guest]: But sport needs storytellers.
[Guest]: Jangal mein moor naacha, kisi ne na dekha.
[Amit Varma]: And is it going to happen on television?
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, a prototype of you, a young Harsha Bhogle, who is 16 years old today and
[Amit Varma]: wants to get into commentary, he's not going to get in because it's all celebs and ex-cricketers
[Amit Varma]: basically.
[Amit Varma]: But other media he possibly can.
[Guest]: And that is the next revolution that is coming, which is what we are doing.
[Guest]: At Crickbuzz.
[Guest]: Or what you and me are doing just now.
[Guest]: Do a podcast.
[Guest]: No force on earth can stop you from having your own channel.
[Guest]: Digital is going to revolutionize it, already is around the world, is going to revolutionize
[Guest]: opinion in sport.
[Guest]: All along we were told, what's your batting average?
[Guest]: You're not allowed to have an opinion.
[Guest]: Now there's this kid coming out of college who knows every number in the world.
[Guest]: And he's projecting those numbers through an algorithm.
[Guest]: He's creating a predictive algorithm.
[Guest]: And he's telling the expert, I think this is what's going to happen.
[Guest]: And he's got as much chance of that coming right as the expert does.
[Guest]: And so we will start having different kinds of broadcasts.
[Guest]: I said that about three years ago.
[Guest]: I said you must have for the very same match, four different kinds of broadcasts.
[Guest]: You must have the expert, expert broadcast for the hardcore lover of the game.
[Guest]: He wants to know technically what is happening, what is right, what's going on.
[Guest]: You must have the storytellers broadcast, you must have the nerds broadcast.
[Guest]: And you must have a broadcast with no commentary.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you can actually potentially have unlimited audio feeds, which you provide,
[Amit Varma]: which people can watch along with the live images in front of them.
[Guest]: So that is what people do in other countries.
[Amit Varma]: They listen to the radio broadcast and watch the telecast.
[Amit Varma]: And is that something you're excited to do going forward?
[Guest]: I would be overjoyed by it.
[Guest]: I mean, I see the talent among young people, young India today is an outrageously talented
[Guest]: country.
[Guest]: We have no right to tell a 17 year old kid who understands sports so well, because you
[Guest]: don't have a batting average, you are not allowed to enter this community.
[Guest]: This game belongs to all of us.
[Guest]: What did we do first?
[Guest]: We said you are not in the cities, you can't play the game.
[Guest]: Then the people in small towns, we said you're a woman, you can't play the game.
[Guest]: Then we said you're disabled, you're physically challenged, you cannot play the game.
[Guest]: Says who?
[Guest]: The visually challenged have a right to play the game.
[Guest]: The deaf and dumb have a right to play the game.
[Guest]: They're having their own World Cup.
[Guest]: The Women's World Cup now is showing us, you watch Smriti Mandhana and Mithali Raj and
[Amit Varma]: Armanpreet Kaur play.
[Guest]: Who decided that they cannot play cricket?
[Guest]: Similarly, who decided you cannot have an opinion on the game?
[Guest]: The television networks will go box office and it's there.
[Guest]: Shah Rukh Khan is box office.
[Guest]: Aamir Khan is box office.
[Guest]: You and me will never get to play that role.
[Guest]: But digital is now allowing everybody to have a voice.
[Guest]: And it's actually right for disruption.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: What's to stop two young kids, 18, 19 years old, to have a discussion on the game?
[Guest]: That's exciting.
[Guest]: They may not have the reach of television, but digital has a great way of just taking
[Guest]: things to people that you never thought it would reach.
[Guest]: Yeah, and what to find this on level?
[Guest]: Who decides that you don't have an opinion?
[Guest]: Earlier, there was a sub-editor who didn't allow your article to get published.
[Guest]: And there was only one newspaper in each city.
[Guest]: So if the sub-editor didn't like you, you published yourself.
[Guest]: I mean, you wrote on the tree or something, whatever.
[Guest]: Then came the television networks.
[Guest]: And the television networks invest so much money in it, they have to go box office.
[Guest]: They have no choice.
[Guest]: It's like, I want to make a Shah Rukh Khan movie.
[Guest]: My movie is already costing 100 and 200 crores.
[Guest]: So I have to have the big stars in it.
[Guest]: I have to have the masala.
[Guest]: I have to have the song.
[Guest]: I have to have whatever.
[Guest]: But what are we seeing in cinema today?
[Guest]: We are seeing Badhai Ho competing with the thugs of Hindustan.
[Guest]: What is the comparison?
[Guest]: That will happen in digital.
[Guest]: We will get to a stage and I don't know what the law is, what the rights will be.
[Guest]: We will get to a stage where there'll be young people sitting and having a ball, watching
[Guest]: the telecast and people just following that soundtrack with the action.
[Amit Varma]: And I hope some young people listening to this podcast now take inspiration from your
[Amit Varma]: words.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, sometimes I meet these young people and I say, what would I give to be
[Guest]: 30 years younger today?
[Guest]: They are, I mean, I see young India and I go, wow, just the sheer ability.
[Guest]: This is inevitable.
[Guest]: It will happen.
[Guest]: And we cannot stand in the way of young people getting into broadcast and digital is going
[Amit Varma]: to help them do that.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll end this episode with sort of a final question that, you know, you've been with
[Amit Varma]: cricket, you've been part of cricket for, you know, more than two and a half decades,
[Amit Varma]: almost three decades.
[Amit Varma]: What gives you hope about the future of the game and what causes you worry?
[Guest]: This game has been written off so many times, just as India as a nation has been written
[Guest]: off so many times and India bounces back.
[Guest]: We are a powerful country at the moment.
[Guest]: Cricket will never die because cricket is embedded in our thoughts.
[Guest]: Cricket is embedded in our culture.
[Guest]: The president of India goes to Australia and he is delivering cricketing parallels.
[Guest]: Australia is trying to invest heavily into India.
[Guest]: What do the two countries have in common?
[Guest]: They did some research and they said the Kangaroo and Bradman are the two most known names across
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: Well, then it came to border, then it came to war, then it whatever, then it came to
[Guest]: sledging, which is for better or worse.
[Guest]: But cricket will never die out of India and T20 will take cricket to places that we never
[Guest]: thought cricket would reach.
[Guest]: It may not go to China, it may not go to the US, but we have to stop this obsession that
[Guest]: everything in life has to go to China and the US.
[Guest]: Cricket is being played in Fiji, in Papua New Guinea, there's 105 countries playing.
[Guest]: T20 cricket will be the missionary that our game needed.
[Guest]: Test cricket was, you know, stiff upper lips, a closed club.
[Unknown]: Hello there, do you have your shoes tied properly?
[Unknown]: No, you're out.
[Unknown]: Oh, your jacket isn't buttoned.
[Guest]: Only six of you can play the game.
[Guest]: No, T20 will take it to 100 countries.
[Guest]: And that I see T20 as a missionary of the game that will bring people in and then they
[Guest]: will start to you know what this test cricket looks like an interesting thing.
[Guest]: So for if you like test cricket, stop trampling on T20 cricket and realize that T20 cricket
[Guest]: is the gateway that's going to draw people into your hidden into a hidden house right
[Guest]: at the end.
[Guest]: The two things that excite me the most of where T20 is taking cricket.
[Guest]: Look at Afghanistan.
[Guest]: Incredible.
[Guest]: Oh, Rashid Khan was telling me the story.
[Guest]: He said he went to a camp that his friend was running and he said, you know, famous,
[Guest]: you must come and inaugurate my camp.
[Guest]: So there were 126 bowlers there.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: 126 bowlers and he thought, you know, there'll be a left arm or there'll be a fast bowler.
[Guest]: 126 leg spinners.
[Guest]: 126 leg spinners growing up in Afghanistan, try and find me that hunger somewhere else.
[Guest]: And did you think Afghanistan would do well?
[Guest]: Do you think Oman would do well?
[Guest]: You get Nepal, Sandeep Lamechani from Nepal comes and he's good enough to win an IPL contract
[Guest]: and play for Delhi Daredevils.
[Guest]: But we were not allowing the Nepal's and the Afghanistan's to play cricket because we said
[Guest]: it's not for, you know, they can't.
[Guest]: So for too long, cricket has prevented people from entering its fold.
[Guest]: Cricket is to allow everybody into its fold.
[Guest]: So I'm excited about what, where T20 will take our game.
[Guest]: And I'm excited about the next generation of opinion makers that digital will allow
[Guest]: in to break this closed field that the enormity of television is bound by.
[Amit Varma]: That's an incredibly inspiring note to end on.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on my show.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to that episode, you can follow Harsha on Twitter at Bhogle
[Amit Varma]: Harsha.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: And you can browse past episodes of the scene in the unseen at scene unseen.in or thinkpragati.com.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Who said healthy food is boring?
[Unknown]: Who said raw veggies is just salads?
[Unknown]: Who said eating fats makes you fat?
[Unknown]: Look forward to my recommendations on healthy food and exercise hacks on the kinetic living
[Unknown]: podcast with me, Coach Urmi every Wednesday on the IBM app website and anywhere you get
[Unknown]: your podcasts from.
[Unknown]: So stay tuned.
[Unknown]: Dishan Hayat from Topper, Naya Sagi from Baby Chakra, Ankur Sachdev from ShareChat, and Akrit
[Unknown]: from Haptic, among many many more. Yep, and we continue to get some of the biggest, smartest,
[Unknown]: and most innovative folks in the country in this space coming here talking to us,
[Unknown]: all for you guys to listen to. So tune in every Tuesday on the IVM app website or wherever you
[Unknown]: get your podcasts from and get a chance to be a part of all of the tech banter and entrepreneurship
[Unknown]: conversations on our Slack channel. Talk to our guests, they show up as well. All you have to do
[Unknown]: is request an invite on ivmpodcast.com slash junior one. Transcribed by https://otter.ai